hey guys i'm dr olo kanoje psychiatrist
and co-founder of healthy gamer
we're on a quest to help the internet
with mental health
today i want to talk to you guys a
little bit about
why we become doormats and how to stop
being a doormat
so the first thing to understand is like
okay why are we doormat so a lot of
people think that they're doormats
because
i'm weak because i can't stand up for
myself because i'm insecure
and so the tricky thing the reason why
it's so hard to stop being a doormat is
because
we sort of misdiagnosed the problem and
so if we think the reason we're a
doormat is because we're weak and then
we try to build our strength up
then we think okay if i become stronger
as a human being then i'll no longer be
a doormat
whereas literally what tends to happen
is that people will will try to focus on
those solutions and they find themselves
being doormats over and over and over
again
and then people start to feel a little
bit powerless and stuck and they're like
yeah i don't know how to stop being a
doormat so let's try to start
by understanding okay what is being a
doormat about
so this sounds absolutely crazy but
being a doormat
is about control and it's actually the
control that you exert
on other people by being a doormat and
what does that mean like that's wild
right like if we think about a
doormat we think oh my god like this
person is so powerless other people walk
all over them
but let's try to understand how that
works and why people
why doormats let other people walk all
over them
so really what it comes down to is
control when you're a doormat
you have a choice right you can either
stand up to someone
and then that person is going to react a
particular way
they may dislike you they may challenge
you they may
say mean things to you and so if you
stand up to someone you're sort of
surrendering control over their reaction
and if you behave like a doormat if you
don't challenge them at all
if you let them walk all over you you
know exactly what they're gonna do
they're gonna continue liking you they
may continue you know
engaging in a relationship with you a
lot of a lot of this information about
doormats comes from abusive
relationships
where it's kind of bizarre because
actually what being a doormat is about
is it's about controlling the other
person right it's about
behaving in a particular way so that the
other person that you're interacting
with
is guaranteed to behave in another way
right so if i'm nice to them if i let
them walk all over me
they won't say mean things to me they'll
continue inviting me over
um you know they they'll treat me not
well but i know the kind of reaction
that i'm gonna get from them
they won't cut me out of their life if i
let them walk all over me
and so i know it sounds really really
bizarre but
being a doormat is actually about
controlling another person right it's
about
behaving in a particular manner to
elicit a particular
response or avoid a particular response
from another person
so this is the wild thing is that
doormats actually have a lot of control
it's not that they lack control it's
that they behave in such a manner
where they actually like
control some of the reactions of people
around them
and so the key to to not being a doormat
anymore is
actually i know this sounds bizarre but
it's not to gain more control
it's to let go of control it's to
surrender
and so the key to becoming uh you know
no longer a doormat and standing up for
yourself
is in letting other people do what
they're gonna do
right i'm gonna do what i'm gonna do i'm
gonna stand up for myself
and if you dislike it that's okay
i have to be okay with surrendering
control of another human being's
interactions
or another human being's reactions in
order to stop being a doormat
i have to be willing to accept that
other people
are gonna do things that i may not be
able to control
in the moment that you surrender that
control the moment that you actually
let another person react however they
want to
is the moment that you stop being a
doormat and when you stand up to someone
what are you doing you're giving that
person a choice right you're giving that
person a choice you're saying
hey if you don't like me because i said
something that you did that was
inappropriate
and you no longer want to hang out with
me that's your choice
standing up for yourself is not about
taking control from other people
it's about giving control to other
people it's about surrendering
it's about saying hey this is what i'm
gonna do and you have the choice right
you're giving them the choice about how
to react and sometimes their reactions
can be painful sometimes their reactions
can be hurtful and the bizarre thing is
that the more
of a doormat that we are the more we're
taking away their choice right we're
making the choice for them
we're saying yeah i don't we can eat
whatever you want to because
you know i want to keep you happy being
a doormat is about keeping other people
happy
how do you keep other people happy if
you just even think about it
keeping someone happy implies that
you're the one who's in control
that you have the power to say yeah
you know i'm gonna do this thing or i'm
gonna let you pick
and therefore you'll be happy and so
bizarrely who's in control of that
situation it's you
right because you're the one who
sacrifices yourself for the sake of
another person
that's not a situation where you lack
control you're the one who's making the
sacrifice
you're the one who has the choice to
sacrifice or let them
respond right you're actually
controlling their reaction by being a
doormat
it's completely wild so the crazy thing
about being a doormat and this is why
so many people get sick in it is because
they think to themselves oh my god
i'm so weak whereas the bizarre thing
is that actually you're really strong
and once you realize that you're really
strong that you actually have
agency over the situation that you're
the one who's in control
and when you let that control go when
you let other people
choose how to react to you instead of
manipulating their reaction
by playing it really safe and being a
doormat and not
rocking the boat that's when you start
to make change
and that's what i see in abusive
relationships right i know this sounds
really bizarre but one of the most
important things
to explain to someone in an abusive
relationship is that in a sense they're
a victim
but they also have agency that
the person in an abusive relationship i
know this sounds bizarre but it takes
two
to make an abusive relationship it takes
two people right it's not just one
you look at an abusive relationship and
you think oh like i'm the victim and
this person has all the power
and there's certainly a power dynamic
there but why does that power dynamic
exist
it's because one person gives their
power to the other person and one of the
best ways to overcome abusive
relationships is to
recognize that you're actually the one
in control
that you're the one who sees that
control to them
you're the one who controls that person
by not rocking the boat
you control their reactions you
manipulate their reactions
you're walking on eggshells all the time
you don't want to upset them
right so who's in control of whether
they get upset
you are and so the crazy thing about
this is that
you know it gets really tricky because a
lot of times people will feel like
oh my god if there's an abusive
relationship and you say that
you know it takes two to to make an
abusive relationship you're blaming the
victim
it's not their fault they're in an
abusive relationship and in a bizarre
way that's not always true
right if you really think about how do
you get someone out of
an abusive relationship and i'm talking
about you know patients that i've worked
with
as a psychiatrist it's not in
playing the victim card it's not saying
oh my god you're a victim
sure certainly bad things have happened
to you traumatic experiences
have happened to you and we deserve
compassion
you know we should be compassionate
towards those people absolutely
but it's actually in empowering that
person right it's in helping that person
understand
hey actually you're the one in control
here you
have power in this relationship and the
reason you give up that power
is to control the other person that you
had
actually exert that power by controlling
the other person's reaction
and the way to get out of that
relationship the way to stop being a
doormat
is bizarrely not gaining more control
but giving it up
saying to the other person you know what
this isn't okay and if you dislike me
for it
so be it if you want to break up with me
because
i'm not willing to accept your
disrespect anymore
that choice is entirely yours so the key
thing about
overcoming being a doormat if you want
to stand up for yourself if you want to
stop being a doormat
it's not about gaining more power
it's not about gaining more control it's
the exact opposite it's surrender
it's let the other person choose put the
choice up to them
you do what you you're gonna do and let
the other person decide
whether that that works for them and it
does or it doesn't and that's exactly
what happens in abusive relationships
when people stand up to them
it doesn't work anymore right and then
you exercise your choice
you say okay if you're not willing to
change then i'm
gone i'm done with this
so i know it sounds super bizarre but if
you want to stop being a doormat
stop trying to control other people
don't try to empower yourself
let yourself surrender to the other
person's choice
let them choose what they're going to
choose but you make your choice and you
let them make theirs
stop making their choice for them stop
manipulating their choice
by sacrificing yourself and then
you'll stop being a doormat so listen
guys
i don't know if you guys like this kind
of stuff or not but you know here at
healthy gamer we're trying to decide
best to serve you best to support you
guys and how best to sort of
help the internet with mental health so
if you guys like this video and you guys
want us to do more of it
go ahead and like subscribe you know
follow all that good stuff
and thanks for listening i'm dr k adios
you